---
name: Psychoanalysis and Politics
semester: Fall 2019
thumbnail: /Content/AUC/events/colloquium/001t.png
cover: /Content/AUC/events/colloquium/001t.png
location: /AUC/events/colloquium/001
uni: AUC
---

Fall 2019

**Psychoanalysis and Politics**

<br>

This colloquium will address the notion of extimacy (extimité) both as a
psychoanalytic concept and as a methodological tool for rethinking the multiple
north/south binaries according to which the reception of Critical Theory is
conventionally structured. As such, we will revisit traditional psychoanalytic theory,
particularly through Freud and Lacan, and as well, explore the status of
psychoanalysis in an international, global context.

<br>

Lacan maintained that the task of psychoanalysis is fundamentally political and
illiberal: the relation between social institutions and the unconscious inform a
political topology which requires a psychoanalytic act, a scilicet, to incite a new form
of knowledge; one that inverts the relationship between truth and knowledge and
frees the former from the mechanisms of enjoyment (jouissance) that dictate
relations of exploitation in society. After 1968, Lacan turned to Marx and Freud to
analyze the regimes of jouissance that structure the social bond (with his concept of
surplus-enjoyment (Mehrlust) fashioned according to Marx’s concept of surplus-
value (Mehrwert) and Freud’s notion of pleasure (Lust). For psychoanalysis, the
concept of jouissance is not simply about individual solipsistic enjoyment, a result of
the attrition and break-down of social bonds and of the community, but rather is
precisely the site of an engagement with an Other, with the social link. In this light,
psychoanalysis does not aim at liberating desires, but at exposing the complicity
between certain desires and their interpretation, i.e. psychoanalysis aims to uncover
the mechanisms and the phantasy that articulate unconscious desires in a specific
dispositif of satisfaction. Through its method of analysis and interpretation,
psychoanalysis directs the subject to the problematic kernel of the unconscious
mode of production. Freud had already introduced this fundamental psychoanalytic
insight: that the dialectics of repression that govern enjoyment are always-already
social. The unconscious, then, is a topological construct that disturbs the Innenwelt
and Umwelt, the inner and outer domains, and is irreducible to nature or culture.
The unconscious is extimate, it is located in the gap that generates the external and
internal. Within this theoretical framework in mind, we would like to bring
attention to the different iterations of psychoanalysis in the non-European context.
The workshop may be structured around the following themes:

<br>

1) What is the psychoanalytic corpus in the margins? This influence is evident, for
example, in the work of Arabic-speaking psychoanalysts of the past century (Fethi
ben Salama, Mustapha Safouan, Chawki Azouri, and Adnan Huballah). What concept
of culture emerges from psychoanalysis and what are its iterations in the Global
South? How is psychoanalysis taken up both theoretically and practically in Latin
America and the Middle East?

<br>

2) How can the extimate—the presence of the social within the unconscious, inform the unconscious production of colonial tropes with respect to non-European cultures? What does psychoanalysis propose with regards to the nature/culture divide? How do the particular psychoanalytic interventions from the margins articulate this modern problematic?