---
name: The Singular, Particular, and Universal
semester: Spring 2019
thumbnail: /Content/AUC/events/colloquium/001c.png
cover: /Content/AUC/events/colloquium/001c.png
location: /AUC/events/colloquium/001
uni: AUC
---


Spring 2019

**The Singular, Particular, and Universal**

<br>

This colloquium will critically revisit the question of universality as it has been
articulated in local contexts since the spread of global capitalism. This inquiry
transpires in the wake of postcolonial theory and the more recent move to
decolonize knowledge production in favor of a global form of consciousness that
assumes that sites of conflict lie between particular cultures. Hegel’s specification of
the singular, the universal, and the particular has been rearticulated within a
number of critical theoretical models, including the work of Marx, Lukács, Adorno,
Badiou, and Zizek, and has set the stage for an exploration of the relationship
between modernity and capitalism, and more specifically, the notion of a capitalist
modernity.

<br>

The singular logic of capital presents the market as that which is
immediate, immanent, and having no criteria beyond itself: the logic of the market
spuriously creates its own logic and mode of production. However, we cannot
uncritically assume that the logic of the market defines the universalist promises of
modernity, for there are different ideological deployments of universality. Most
importantly, we assume that universality cannot be taken as a pre-established
substantive condition that is pre-determined for particular social formations.

<br>

In this respect, capitalist modernity is neither totalizable nor homogeneous. It is permeated
and interrupted by non-capitalist strands of modernity, and there are even “anti-
modern modern” practices of capitalism. Thus, the question of whether there are
multiple (alter-) modernities can only be posed from the historically specific
perspective of capitalist modernity. Within this framework, the workshop may be
structured around the following themes:

<br>

1) What is the fundamental, ontological node of contestation between the universal
and the particular, which underlies the question of capitalist modernity in the Global
South? What do counter capitalist modernities look like? How is the relationship
between the particular and the universal to be articulated? How does one move
from the position of the singular to the universal?

<br>

2) What is the relationship between historical time (concrete time) and the abstract
time of capital (homogenous empty time)? Is there a peculiar “southern time,” a
transnational dynamic that determinately negates abstract time?
3) What are the trajectories of Marx’s method of critique in its local instantiations?
What kind of concept formation did local Marxists in the Global South undertake in
their social struggles, and how does the provincializing of Marxism reverberate in
political discourses? Is there a colonial mode of production, and how have critical
theorists from the south considered it?