---
name: Psychoanalysis and Politics
semester: Fall 2019 Colloquium
cover: /Content/AUB/events/colloquium/002t.png
location: /AUB/events/colloquium/002
uni: AUB
---


Fall 2019

**Psychoanalysis and PoliticsJokes and Civil War**

<br>

The “Extimacies: critical theory from the Global South” Mellon colloquium will re-convene
for its second year to explore the relationship between psychoanalysis and politics. The
sessions of the colloqium will be divided into three parts: the first part will serve as an
introduction to the central works of the Slovenian School of Psychoanalysis which since the
90s has formulated a unique theoretical field by bringing together post-Cartesian Philosophy
[Kant and Hegel in particular], Freudian Psychoanalysis, and Marx. The aim of the first part
of the Colloquium is focus on the relevance of theoretical psychoanalysis for politics today
with regards to how we understand ideology and authority in particular, what does
psychoanalysis offer by way of analysis to our understanding of neoliberal regimes in society
today? What can psychoanalysis provide in relationship to the increase in populist politics,
racism, and sexism today?

<br>

The second part of the Colloquium will center around Arabic psychoanalytic writings from
the twentieth century with a particular focus on George Tarabishi, Adnan Huballah,
Mustapha Safouan, and Fethi Ben Salama. The aim of this workshop is to tease out how
psychoanalysis has been employed for the analysis of culture and society in the Arab world
in the past century.

<br>

The Colloquium this term convenes in preparation for the topic of Jokes and Civil War. This
coming theme of the Colloquium will be concerned with the Lebanese Civil War and takes
its cue from experience of the research group “Jokes, War, and Genocide: emancipating
modes of commemoration” led by Damir Andresavic in Bosnia ex-Yoguslavia. The aim of this
part of the Colloqium is to set up a research group around jokes about the Lebanese civil
war. What can comedy [as developed by Hegel, Bergson, and Freud] offer to a post-war
society in which commemoration has been delimited to the slogan of “remember so as not
to repeat”. What does the joke about civil war expose in its own structure as a ‘playful
judgement’ ? A joke is comical because it brings together incommensurables , further it is
only freedom that can produce a joke, a freedom to play with ideas. A joke brings forth
something that is concealed and hidden: what is missing in commemoration that the joke
refuses to repress?

<br>