---
name: Singular, Particular and the Universal colloquium
semester: Spring 2019
thumbnail: 001.png
cover: 001t.png
---

**Singular, Particular and the Universal colloquium**

<br>

The central focus for this workshop was to revisit the question of universality as it has been articulated in local contexts since the spread of global capitalism. In our case, the specificity focused on Spanish-speaking Latin American. To such demand, the inquiries posed an importance for a return to Marx’s texts in relation to Hegel’s specification of the singular, the universal and the particular. According to the initial work plan, the singular logic of capital creates its own logic and mode of production, thus signaling towards a specificity in each locality where such analysis takes place. For example, our main concern during this workshop was to target the logic of capital in Latin America in relation to the century-long Marxist tradition, focusing our study specifically in Mexico. How has this capitalistic perspective influenced the philosophical (and psychoanalytic) endeavor of creating a new modernity in Latin America and Mexico?
Henceforth, the title of the workshop was “Between Hegel and Marx: Bridges Towards a New Understanding of a Concept”, where our main focus was to draw a connection between the Marxist and Hegelian readings, giving special attention to Moishe Postone’s Time, Labor and Social Domination. The format of the workshop was a two-hour bi-weekly session, conducted by either of the co-investigators, with core-readings to introduce the theme and hinge-readings to situate the relevancy of such topics in contemporary Latin America. The sessions were as follow: 1) “Introduction to Marx” (February 8, 2019); 2) “Reading Marx” (February 22, 2019); 3) “Towards Real Abstraction” (March 8, 2019); 4) “The Force of Hegel” (March 22, 2019); 5) “Dialects of Desire: Lacan Reading Hegel” (April 5, 2019); 6) “Where is Marx in Latin America?” (April 25, 2019).

<br>
