---
name:  June 20, 2020
semester: The scandal of civil war - a psychoanalytic approach
cover: /Content/AUB/events/workshops/003c.png
location: /AUB/events/workshops/003
uni: AUB
---

**Spring 2020 Workshop Series**

<br>

What can psychoanalysis offer to the analysis of civil war? Is there an alternative to the clinic of mourning in
such context? And if so, what would the dismantling of the clinic of mourning look like? This panel discussion
brings together two contexts, that of Bosnia and Lebanon, in order to consider the questions of civil war and its
so-called post-war temporality.

<br>

The scandal of civil war: a psychoanalytic approach? is the third conversation of a joint event series on Critical Thought organized by Beirut Institute for Critical Analysis and Research (BICAR), Goethe-Institut Libanon and Rosa-
Luxemburg-Foundation – Beirut office

<br>

**About Bicar**

Established in 2015, the Beirut Institute for Critical Analysis and Research (BICAR) aims to promote critical
thought and analysis with a special focus on studying manifestations of modernity in Lebanon and the Middle
East. BICAR provides a platform for researchers, academics, artists, writers, students, and interested members
of the public to engage with social, cultural, and political developments, and is committed to the relationships
between intellectual inquiry, social reality, and social change.

<br>

**Damir Arsenijević**

is Professor of Literary and Cultural Studies at the University of Tuzla, Bosnia and
Herzegovina. He is a literary theorist and a psychoanalyst in training. His artistic and theoretical interventions
throughout Yugoslavia are located at the intersection of art-academia-activism. Through these interventions, he
initiates and holds community meetings in public spaces during which communities reconstruct the stories of
violent privatization of the commons, of war, and of genocide. He is a founder of the art-theory group "Jokes,
war, and genocide" and the Psychoanalytic Seminar Tuzla (pstz.org). His latest book was “Unbribable Bosnia
and Herzegovina: The Fight for the Commons” published by Nomos Verlag in 2014. Currently, he is working
on a book and archive entitled "Love after genocide".

<br>


**Rohit Goel**

is Professor of Critical Analysis, Art, and Design and Director of Programming at the Institute for
Critical Analysis, Art, and Design, Bombay. His research employs Marxian and psychoanalytic methods to
analyze the historical emergence of capitalism and the nation form, with an emphasis on the Middle East. As a
Fulbright Scholar and Mellon Fellow, he spent seven years in Syria and Lebanon studying Arabic and
conducting ethnographic and archival research. He is the co-editor of Lacan contra Foucault: Subjectivity, Sex,
Politics (London: Bloomsbury, 2019). Rohit has developed and taught courses in continental psychoanalysis and
philosophy, critical theory, history, political economy, social theory, as well as writing style, argument, and logic,
at the University of Chicago, Sciences Po (Paris and Menton), the Chicago Centre in Paris, the American
University of Beirut, and Jnanapravaha Mumbai. He received a BA in Social Studies from Harvard College and,
as Harvard’s Paul Williams Fellow to Emmanuel College, an M.Phil. in Social and Political Sciences from the
University of Cambridge. He was awarded an MA in Political Science from the University of Chicago.


<br>

**The conversation will be chaired by Nadia Bou Ali**

member of BICAR and Assistant Professor at the
Civilization Studies Program at the American University of Beirut, she is co-editor of Lacan contra Foucault,
subjectity, sex, and politics(Bloomsbury 2018), and author of Hall of Mirros: psychoanalysis and the love of
Arabic (Edinburgh University Press, forthcoming Feb 2019). Her research interests revolve around: modern
Arabic intellectual history, Critical Theory, and Psychoanalysis.

<br>


"The place of the analyst is not by the Prince; he cannot accept to be his advisor or to receive any other official
recognition. Neither should he look for his place on the side of those who oppose the Prince, the princes of the
future, if ever the winds of history may happen to favor them. The analyst has nothing to do with those who
make laws, neither the laws of today, nor those of tomorrow, because those who call upon him as an analyst are
both outside the law and outside what contests it. In a nutshell: the analyst is not on the winning side." Jean
Allouch.